#### Thesis
###### Towards foundation model for viral diseases.
[Respiratory Viral diseases](https://www.cdc.gov/nrevss/php/dashboard/index.html) have had a significant global impact, affecting millions of people worldwide. Estimating the potential number of positive cases is crucial for controlling disease spread and allocating necessary resources effectively. However, in the early stages of an outbreak, limited data availability poses significant challenges for accurate estimation. Additionally, employing individual models for each disease in specific regions proves less efficient. This work aims to train a foundation model on viral diseases, enabling estimation of positive cases during outbreaks as well as for existing diseases. Several recent foundation models have been pretrained on different datasets spanning various domains. Without appropriate post training or finetuning, these models cannot adapt to the specific characteristics of viral disease related data. Furthermore, these models operate in a channel-independent manner, thus failing to consider the interactions among different variables. Yet, variables such as the number of infected cases and vaccinated individuals are pivotal in enhancing the results within the domain of viral diseases. This endeavor seeks to develop a domain-specific foundation model tailored specifically for viral diseases, adapted to the unique data characteristics. 

###### Foundation models (vs sota)
Several state-of-the-art (SOTA) deep learning models for time series [TimeMixer, Timesnet, iTransformer, PatchTST and others] employ a model per dataset scheme where the model is trained and tested on the subseries of the overall time series. Specifically, there is a split point in the series. The data before the split point is considered as the training set and data after the split point is considered as the testing set. The train and test sets both come from the same series and when the series is stationary, they should have similar statistical properties. Therefore, the model trained for that series may not show satisfactory results for another series. However, in cases of pandemic and viral diseases, we may lack sufficient training data in the initial days of disease spread. In these cases, utilizing a foundation model pretrained on sufficient time series data may allow to get better results for pandemic and viral diseases with finetuning. For this purpose, our objective is to study current foundation models in this modality and study their characteristics. Our goal to evaluate the results in **few shot (when training set covers < 10% of the data) and full shot settings (training set with 80% coverage of time series)**. Moreover we intend to evaluate foundation models on **20 – 80 setting** where training set covers initial 20% and test set cover remaining 80% of the values. We aim to compare **state-of-the-art (dataset specific) models, foundation models, statistical models and baselines**. 


###### Pretraining foundation models (from scratch vs cross modality transfer)
Foundation models of time series can be divided into two types. Recent methods have utilized LLMs pretrained on text and finetuned on time series modality. These methods have shown various ways to efficiently finetune the network and improve time series exploration. The other type pretrains the foundation from scratch on time series modality only. These methods require pretraining on sufficient time series datasets. Pretraining foundation models for time series data poses several challenges. Each time series has different characteristics like number of channels, seasonality, trend, and frequency. The foundation model should be trained on the diverse datasets. Pretraining plays crucial in reasonable results. Some methods use pretraining in multiple stages. Our goal is to study effective **pretraining methods**.

###### Exogenous variables (channel independence vs channel mixing)
Several foundation models like TimeGPT, TimesFM and others have pretrained in channel independent manner therefore the influence of exogenous variables on target variable is not incorporated. Some methods like PatchTST have shown improved results with channel independence on certain datasets and showed that channel mixing may give higher error due to noise. However, in case of pandemic and viral diseases, the exogenous variables like weather, and number of visits can effect results. Our goal is to evaluate effective ways of channel mixinig to improve results. Moreover, we aim to compare results for **channel independence vs channel mixing** on the viral disease data.

###### Detecting the beginning of pandemic
Detecting the beginning of a pandemic involves examining time series data besides and various other data. For example, genetic sequencing, epidemiological surveillance, and behavioral trends. It involves identifying unusual patterns in health metrics such as hospital admissions, or spikes in symptoms reported by patients, especially for respiratory illnesses. Monitoring real-time epidemiological data for signs of clustering in specific regions to are critical steps. Health systems also analyze environmental, behavioral, and socio-economic factors that may contribute to outbreaks. Effective surveillance often incorporates ways to detect anomalies and predict trends while relying on global reporting networks to identify outbreaks across borders. Communication with healthcare providers and communities further aids in recognizing early warning signs, enabling timely responses.

